Cloud services (#14)
bespinian/blog: content/posts/cloud-services.md

---

> title: Cloud Services

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Kurt's Cloud Journey
```

Reviewer 2: The `title: ` part needs to be kept, though.

author: Philippe Hässig
comments: true

> date: 2023-10-01

Author: Change to current.

---

In this post we would like to give you an overview over the key services every cloud infrastructure provider is offering.

<!--more-->

## Prologue

> This story is about Kurt. Kurt is responsible for running the ticket shop of a local theater group, It has the following features:

Reviewer: `ticket shop`: Maybe "online ticket shop" would be more clear? At first I thought Kurt was sitting in a ticket booth somewhere.

`It has the following features:`: This seems very formal to me. If it's a casual little story, it might be an idea to keep the whole tone a bit more casual and use less "exact" wording that to me comes across a bit more technical. => "Kurt's shop lets you do the following:"

* Lists upcoming events with some pictures as a teaser.
* Allows visitors to buy tickets.

> * Sends a PDF with the ticket by e-mail.

Reviewer: To fit with the above suggestion (... means leave as is)
```suggestion
- List upcoming events with ...
- Allow visitors to ...
- Sends a PDF ...
```

Because Kurt already knows one or two things about "the cloud" he's setup a small virtual machine at his favourite hyperscale cloud provider and deployed the app. Most of the time the application is idling. It only serves a couple of requests per day.

> ## Chapter 1: The black whole of storage

Reviewer: typo: `black hole`
Or is this an intentional pun?

While Kurt is getting a well deserved rest on a Greek island, he receives a call from the theater group's president. She tried to publish some new events in the shop. After entering the second event, the shop started to throw weird errors and is now unresponsive.

> Reluctantly Kurt fetches his laptop from his bag and starts to investigate. He finds out that the server ran out of storage. After inreasing the disk size via the cloud provider's console, the shop runs smoothly again. He finds out that somebody uploaded a lot of large pictures for an event. The larger disk should hold for a while, but he knows that it is only a matter of time until it runs out of space again.

Reviewer: typo: `increasing`

At home Kurt refactors the shop to use his cloud provider's **object storage** service. He moves all the pictures and other static content there.

> In an object storage (also well known under the name "S3" at AWS) we can store all kinds of files (pictures, videos, documents etc) without ever having to increase its size. Usually this service is payed for exactly the amount of storage it holds, plus the incoming and outgoing traffic.

Reviewer: grammar: `Usually, ...`

## Chapter 2: Data, data

> Because the shop was so userfriendly, the theater group started to let other groups use the system for their events too. After a while several theater groups in the region run a couple of hundred shows per year through Kurt's shop. Which is still running on that same small virtual machine.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because the shop was so user-friendly, the theater group started to let other groups use the system for their events, too. After a while, several theater groups in the region run a couple of hundred shows per year through Kurt's shop, which is still running on that same small virtual machine.
```

> While Kurt is on a hiking trip in the Swiss mountains he gets a call from the group's president. The shop is again unresponsive or throws weird errors. He grabs his laptop (which he always brings to hiking trips for cases like these) and starts to investigate. Apparently the virtual machine has run out of space again. The database has grown a lot and slowly filled the disk.

Reviewer: grammar: `Apparently, the...`

On the way home Kurt starts to setup a **document database** using his cloud provider's management interface. Luckily he's already been using [MongoDB](https://www.mongodb.com/) for the shop on the virtual machine and because the provider has a compatible product available, the migration was pretty easy.

All cloud providers offer a set of different managed database services. What they all have in common is that you don't need to care about anything around that database system. It is usually fully managed by the provider, which means they monitor it, they update it and they care for the safety of your data.

They even do that complicated active-active replication configuration on a global scale for you. If you need it. And if you have the budget.

Usually they have compatible products for Postgres, MySQL/Mariadb, MongoDB and even Microsoft SQL Server.

## Chapter 3: Scale without limits

> While Kurt is on a diving trip in the caribbean, the president of the theater group calls him again. They ran a social media campaign for their new play. One post went viral on TikTok and now the shop is very slow or even unresponsive. Kurt knew something like this was coming, so he takes his laptop out of his dry suite and starts to investigate.

Reviewer: typo: `dry suit`

The virtual machine is totally unresponsive and the provider's metrics show a very high CPU load. He assigns a larger CPU type to the machine and restarts it. The shop is now responsive again, but still a bit slow. Kurt lets it be for the moment and starts to think about how this scenario can be avoided in the future. Back in the hotel he starts packing the application into a container and configures the cloud provider's **serverless container runtime**. Now the application automatically scales up when there's more demand. And even better, it automatically scales down to zero during the night, when nobody wants to buy theater tickets, which allows the theater group to save some money for other things.

Serverless container runtimes and similar services let you use exactly as much resources as your applications need. This allows you not only to scale automatically, it also can safe you a lot of money if done right.

> Another advantage is that you don't have to manage a server anymore. Most of the time you just throw some code at it and the service knows what it needs to do.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another advantage is that you don't have to manage a server anymore. Most of the time you just throw some code at it and the service knows what it needs to do. It even restarts failed services for you, no matter where in the world you are.
```

Kurt starts to draft a plan for refactoring the app. Instead of immediately producing the PDF and e-mail, the app now sends a message into the provider's **message queue** system. The code which produces the PDF and sends the e-mail now runs as a serverless function, triggered by the message. This means that the PDF production and e-mail sending is now run asynchronously in the background. The order process feels much faster now and the serverless container runs with a single instance most of the time.

Using message queues you can vastly improve the performance and resource usage of an application. These messages can either be processed by your own application or you can define a serverless function which will be triggered by a message. Obviously this has a huge impact on the application's architecture and needs to be planned carefully.

## Conclusion

> This was a really high level overview of some of the advantages a modern cloud provider can offer you. We learned about some of the major services all cloud providers offer in one way or another: virtual machines, object storage, managed databases, serverless runtimes and message queues.

Reviewer: IMO this could be fleshed out a bit. I like the focus, but I believe there are more lessons to be learned. I.e.
- That you can constantly evolve your application to meet the current needs.
- That you actually can go on holidays and only need to take your laptop along, because you can access your infrastructure from anywhere there's internet.
- That you can offload operational work and thus achieve more and still go diving.

Author: Added:
> The major advantages that all services have in common are availability, scalability, adaptability, and security. These are all important points, which usually take quite some effort when you run them yourself.

Don't want to go deeper here. It would be another blog post. But it's still worth mentioning.
